She was here for commencement? Yeah, she was here
for commencement. She grew up in the next town. She
grew up in the town of Menard. Oh, okay. I saved her
from a life at the University of Texas. She was a
junior at the University of Texas when we got
married. We decided that we'd wait and let her
finish up her degree at some other time, which
she's never done. Mm-hmm. And we lived in what was
known as the new project houses. Yes. $37.50 a
month. Describe that. Oh, beautiful facilities,
really, compared to what else we had. These were
the, well, they're torn down now, but there were
tennis courts in there. But they were very nice, a
two-story apartment, and we were on the second
story. Had a nice living room, kitchen, dining
room, living room together, and two bedrooms. And
it was $37.50, and that was great. Furnished?
Yeah, furnished. Oh, my. Yeah. No. But $19.50,
that was very reasonable. And we had no
automobile. And you were in a small little
community of other young marrieds. Right. Now,
were these the old project house structures that
had been redone? No, these were new, relatively
new. The old project houses were really trashy
stuff. They'd been worn out for years. These had
been there for a while. I think they were built
during the early part of the war. Reckon how many
couples were over there at one time? How many
could... Let's see, there'd be four couples to the
building, and there were probably about... I'm
going to say 30 or 40 buildings, so quite a few. 100
or so couples. What kind of community activities
did you young marrieds have? Very nice. It was
really good. We had either penny ante poker games
where you carried the pennies in a jar, you know, or
a bridge or those sort of things and shared dinners
with each other. Picnics. Picnics, go to the
events, go to the movies. At that time, well, we
were one of the last ones to get an automobile, but
next door neighbors had an automobile, and we'd go
to the movies. At that time, they had the Midnight
Surprise movies. That guy in? No, this was down in
downtown Bryant, Palace Theater, whatever it was
down there. It was always a surprise, but always a
very good movie. But it started at midnight on
Saturday night, so we'd take those in. Let's see,
picnics there? Did y'all sometimes have an
outdoor cookout? Oh, yeah, we would. Somebody
would have friends on the coast and get a big bunch
of shrimp or a big bunch of oysters in and have...
You know, sort of a communal feed. What kind of
shopping opportunities were there at Southgate
then? There was a small grocery store there at
Southgate. There was the cleaners.
And the drugstore. And the drugstore. What was
their name? Maitley. Maitley's Pharmacy. Yeah,
Maitley's Pharmacy. Then Maitley and his wife had
that dress shop. It was very convenient. If you
didn't have an automobile, it was very
convenient. You could have everything you really
had right there, close to you. Right, so you finish
your degree in one year, then what? Then I was...
contacted by a fellow who had called John McNeely.
They were setting up, this was New York City, they
were setting up a business, or they had the
business already going, called Industrial
Commodity Corporation, but they were looking for
someone who had a background in ag research, and
particularly in livestock. And so they came down
and talked to me, and it sounded like a good
opportunity to do something different. see the
big city. So we took it for the sum total of $5,000 a
year. Moved to the big city and moved. Rich, our
older son, was born here. And I took off in a
trailer, pulling a trailer with all of our, what
little household goods we had, and drove to New
York. And Doc said the baby came up, flew up. Now,
this is 1951 or 2?
No, this was late 52. 52. And you were up there how
long? I was up there a little over two years. And
finally decided that we lived in a little town on
Long Island called Belmore. On the Long Island
Railway. So it was an easy commute in, except it
took an hour each way. So I caught the 657 every
morning. They get into work at 9 o'clock. I said, it
took two hours. And they came in about 7 o'clock
that night. I finally realized that I had a little
baby girl that I had not seen in the daylight since
she was born, except occasionally on the weekend.
So we left there and moved. They set up a Regional
Livestock Marketing Research Organization in
Denver, which is sponsored by the 12 western
states. And at that time it was called the 12
Western States and Texas, but we weren't
officially a western state at that time. But it was
headquartered
operationally out of Colorado State, but our
offices were in Denver. So I moved down there and
stayed there until 50 spring of our winter of 56
moved down here then and what were you going to do we
were setting up the big problem that they were that
we were trying to address was how to forecast the
market conditions for feeder livestock coming
off of it coming off of the ranges how to how to
anticipate what the volume are going to be and some
of the conditions and weights were going to be how
the livestock coming in off of the winter ranges
and fall ranges and the cattle feeding market. The
reason it was located in Denver because that's
where most of the cattle feeding was taking place
up in that area. All right, and you come here to do
what? Came here then to
work with, when I came here, I came down one time to
see some people in Ag Eco, John McNeely, and he said
they were starting a new program over here called
the something like the Texas Transportation
Institute and Fred Benson was the honcho of it and
they were looking for somebody to join up with that
program thought it might be a good opportunity to
come over and see him so they had to talk to him over
and talk to Fred and he said well they were looking
for somebody they wanted to look at the customer
needs in transportation. We'd always been
concerned about the producer of transportation,
the people that were doing the actual physical
work of moving people and goods and so forth. And we
really had not paid that much attention to what the
people who were using the transportation really
wanted. So we said, we've got Mr. Thomas H.
McDonald, who was chief of the old Bureau of Public
Roads for many, many years, 34 years, I think. And
he's going to be sort of, he and Gib Gilchrist are
the ones that sort of put this together, and
they're looking for somebody to sort of take this
program over and run with it. That's Mr.
McDonnell, by the way. Did you ever know him,
Louie? He was a very nice guy, very sharp. I don't
believe so. So Fred said, now, I'm going to be
working over there, but I didn't have a decision.
It's going to be on whether Mr. MacDonald and Mr.
Gilchrist would, uh, they'll be the ones making
the decision whether to hire you. So I went over and
visited with them and, uh, went back to Denver and
got a call. Yeah, they'd like to have me and that
Fred Benson would want to deal with. And so Fred,
uh, had then wrote me a letter and said that, uh,
They had agreed that the position was open and that
they'd like to have me and that they were willing to
pay $7,000 a year. I said, Fred, Mr. Benson. We
didn't call him Fred then. Mr. Benson, I just left a
job in New York that was paying me $12,500 and moved
to Denver to take one for $10,000. Now I'm going to
move back down here to take one for $7,000. At least
get it up to $7,200. It's even a little better. He
said, I hate to tell you this, but that's all the
money I've got. And said, not only that, we've
already turned in the budgets for next year. And so
you won't get a raise next year either. So I said,
OK. We were anxious to start to get back here. And so
we took the job again. And
what was the name of the organization at that time?
Well, it started out, it was really the
organization was created in 1950, and the
original document had it as the Texas Institute of
Transportation, until they looked at... The
acronym. The acronym. And so I was still somewhere
where we had the old original document where it's
all been redlined on and that's been changed over
to the Texas Transportation Institute. And it
reported to, organizationally, to the office of
whom? Reported to Fred, well, Fred Benson was the,
at that time it was called the executive director,
not director, no, executive officer. In
engineering. Oh, and then, all right. Fred was,
when we first came here, Fred was a professor of
civil engineering, and he had responsibility for
some of the operations of TTI. All right, but your,
so your appointed title then was director of TTI?
No, I was an associate research economist. Oh,
okay, and was he the director of? Well, he was the
executive officer. We didn't have a director at
that time. Just make believe that I didn't know
Fred Benson. Describe him in personality and
appearance and habit and so forth. As you probably
know, Fred was a Navy captain.
Navy captain? Mm-hmm. No, I did not. Oh, yes. And he
was always, of course, he always looked like a
movie star. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. a very personable
fellow, not an effusive type. He was as straight a
shooter as I ever met in my life.
Anything he told you he would do, as far as I know, he
never backed down on it. He always came through
anything he told you that he would try to do, even
then he would try to do it. But he said, now, you're
going to be working on, he said, I want Mr. McDonald
to sort of be with you on all this, because he's been
involved in all this, and it's been of particular
interest of his. So we worked, I think, until late
57 when Mr. McDonald died. And of course, by that
time, Mr. Gilchrist was getting pretty feeble. He
was housebound most of the time. So I took most of my
work over. to his house and worked with him over
there. Now what was his official... He really
didn't have an official title. He was former
chancellor, but he... TTI was really put together
by Mr. McDonnell, Fred Benson who was here, Mr.
Gilchrist who was chancellor, and Mr. DeWitt
Greer who was head of the highway department. The
three of those really conceived the idea of having
a research institute that could really help move
transportation forward. All three of them had a
long-standing interest in transportation. Now,
Benson was out of mechanical engineering? Civil.
But public transportation was and all was one of
his... Highway transportation, particularly he
was in the physical side, in materials and
construction, that sort of side of
transportation. Now, it wasn't long until Fred
was moved up to head, when Cy Sandestead retired,
Fred was moved up to head the Civil Engineering
Department, and was, at that same time, was also
made director of TTI, a position that he held until
about 62, when Jack Keese then was named, Fred
moved up to Dean, and Jack Keese was made director.
Where was TTI physically located? Right up here on
the absolute corner of Spence and Ross. It was a
little small two-story building called the
Highway Research Center. When we moved into it, or
when I got here, I think there were four of us. So it
was a building that was plenty big for four people.
And it was primarily a research organization. We
had two research projects underway, both of which
we got finished successfully. What were they? The
customer requirements in transportation, which
is the one that I had, and then there was one on the
effects of highway transportation on land values
that a fellow named Bill Atkins, who is dead now,
directed. Who were in those early days, who were
the key people in Austin that were supportive of
TTI? DeWitt Greer was the number one supporter.
He's the one that, and he supported us over
a substantial amount of resistance from some of
his second level people that really didn't see the
need for research. and in any in any manner in fact
one of them that we were told who that Mr. Greer said
that when we had a research project that he wanted
done he said now you take it down and work with
so-and-so down here in this department and he'll
be the one that you work with so we went down and
talked to him and he said I'll tell you what boy
this, be sure you print that on some soft paper and
bring it over to me that way so I'll have some real
use for it. Not real encouraging, not real
encouraging, but we did have the support of the
administration and that always helps a lot who can
use it correctly. Were there any other states that
had anything that could serve as a model for TTI?
Not really. There have been, since then, a number
of states that have come in. We have been used as a
model for a bunch of states. Pennsylvania's
used us almost exclusively as a model. Virginia
has been doing it for many, many years. They've got
a little different, most of them have a little
different twist to a lot of things, but we were sort
of the first one, and I guess the first one that was
set up as a part of a university system.
specifically to do research in transportation.
And in the 50s and 60s, what were some of the major
projects that y'all did that really helped to move
it up in importance and credibility?
During that period, we had the Highway Revenue Act
of 19... 58, I believe it was, which for the first
time made federal funds available to the states to
do work. This was an old interstate system that was
created back in the old Eisenhower program. And so
one of the big things we're doing is when you quit
doing what you're doing now, that is dealing with
local roads or regional roads, just going from
this city to that one, and it's kind of this
cross-country uh super highway system uh to begin
to look at what effect is this going to have on those
cities that you're either going through on the
bigger cities or that you're bypassing those
small ones that you just go by and leave them
sitting out on the limb so some of the earliest work
that we did was in the effects of these bypasses on
smaller cities from cities the size of Merkel out
by Abilene down to Baytown and some of those like
that and to look at what does 410 do to the whole land
value economic activity in San Antonio. So we did
studies on a large number of those. Also we began to
look at for the first time to look at the fact we've
been doing how we work for all these years, and
we've been using the same materials and using them
the same way. We've been cookbooking everything.
We do it because you put so much of this and so much of
that, and this is the way it's done, and practical
experience shows that may be working out pretty
well, but we find out that really it isn't. So we
don't really have much, and we're still working on
that problem, by the way, but we've really not
improved our whole materials application
systems like we should. So we started working in
that using some things like looking at new
plasticers and additives that you could put in
asphalt. People sort of assumed that asphalt was a
common material. That is, it was all the same.
That's asphalt. Asphalt's asphalt and they're
all just alike. Absolutely wrong. Asphalt is what
you get out of a barrel of crude that's left in the
bottom after you've taken everything you want out
of the rest of it. So it's going to be a combination
of a hundred different things in different
quantities. So we're still trying to
characterize and get ways that you can physically
identify those differences and find out
physically then which ones of these chemical
compositions work and which ones don't. As you can
see, it becomes a very, very big problem that we've
been working on for many years. All right, so Fred
Benson as dean, he was supportive. Right. And as
the years went on, now four decades, did TTI remain
closest to engineering?
And
were there any other institutions that ever tried
to combat TTI to undo it? Not really. Not any that I
know of that overtly tried to do it. Internally, at
that time, I know Dean Benson
And I really don't know the background of why this
is so, but Dean Benson felt that he probably was not
getting the support that he would like to have from
Dr. Harrington. Now, whether this was because of a
Gilchrist-Harrington problem or what,
but... post-retirement era sort of devoted to
transportation and TTI. But as far as, we had good
support from the administration of the highway
department at that time. And so that helped
tremendously. That gave us a base support in
research, which is the essential element that
anybody going into a structured research program
like we're in now, where you have that many people
involved, You have to have some sort of a base you
can count on from year to year. Now, you're going to
bring in outside, other outside money, but you
have to have that base to really keep it going from
year to year.
Fred was soon, not too long, in 1975, no,
1961. I'm trying to get my people and dates
together. He was made dean. Jack Keese was made
director at that time, but Fred still, we still
reported to Fred. Now As you probably, and I hope
you recall, we've gone through all of the
different variations of how you administered the
system and the A&M University. And later, that's
one of the things I want you to comment about, which
you think is better. All right, but as he becomes
dean, then you'll have another supporter in the
key location. How did you introduce the TTI to Earl
Rutter? Well, this... Earl Rutter was, I had known
Earl Rutter for years and years, so that helped
some. Well, not necessarily helped, but it did
give an entree. And he was very supportive. We've
always sort of taken the practical approach to the
research, that it's not highly theoretical, that
it's going to be put on a bookshelf and left alone,
but it's going to be useful to somebody. And he
recognized that, and he became active. He
addressed every one of our short courses that we
had and became very active in the things that we
were doing. Got some real lessons in writing
speeches for
President Rutter. It was very interesting. He is
the most effective man I ever saw, indeed, in
short. one-on-one type groups and with smart,
sharp groups, but public speaking was not his
forte. Did he give you all any advice in what kinds
of speeches he wanted written? Yeah, he did. Can
you share that? He said that, one, you don't put
those big, long, complicated words in there that
are hard to pronounce. He wants it in short bites, I
mean, not bites at that time, but short sentences
where you can get the point across without having
to go into a great deal of elaboration, and don't be
long-winded. Keep the paragraphs down to a short
thing. Just a good... See, he had... I really don't
remember what dates this was, but he had taken a
course in speaking under Dr. Hurd and sent out a
memo to all of the... system parts and university
administrators that he thought this was such a
good idea that he would encourage everybody else
to do that. So I did that too. I took that course
under Dr. Harrison Hurt and still consider him to
be a real good friend. He's a very, very fine
fellow. You said that you knew Mr. Rutter before he
became president. Describe that acquaintance.
Well, I mentioned before that he grew up in the Eden
area, which is close to where my family was. We were
in Junction. And my two sisters and his, actually
went to school at the same time he did in Eden, and
then knew his wife, Margaret, very well. They were
sort of peer group. And then my brother ran his
ranch for her. a good number of years, immediately
after World War II. So while we were not old-time
big drinking buddies, I had known him and knew who
he was. He knew who I was. Chick still... Describe
Mrs. Rudder as you all knew her as a young person.
Well, she was... I didn't really know her that
well. My two older sisters are quite a bit older
than I am. They, they knew her quite well. She was,
she was a, they lived on the ranch called, she was a
Williamson and the ranch was a very nice ranch
located between Hext and London and it's still
there. She and, she has one brother still living,
Rusty, and he has a part of the ranch too, the
original part of the ranch, but They've been a
solid old ranching family.
She went to school in, say, Menard and then Eden, I
think. I don't know whether that's when she and
Earl met in that period of time or not. She told me
that she met him really because her brother had
gone to JTAC at the same time Mr. Rutter did. He
brought his yearbook home, and she said, when I saw
the picture of that handsome guy, he's six years
older than she, and she said, we had a few dates when
I was a freshman at the university. But by the time
I'm a junior, she said, we began to date a lot, and
seniors were serious. He was then the football
coach, and she got a job teaching as a first year
teacher, and I believe she said the fall of 36. at
Brady, making $100 a month. He was making $135, and
they got married the next June. She said Earl had
saved $80, so she said, I got married on $80 in
faith.
She said, I thought that he was the handsomest,
that picture was the handsomest looking boy I'd
ever seen. All right, so... you had this
acquaintance with Mr. Rutter and he became also a
strong supporter.
Were there any, did y'all, did anybody ever try to
throw rocks in the road, pun intended, for TTI here
on campus? I think mostly we were ignored pretty
well. We didn't really, bother anybody in the
terms that we weren't cutting into anybody else's
territory. I guess the most friction that we have
had has probably been with our closest ally, and
that's civil engineering, because we do have so
many joint appointments and differences
between, always comes up differences between
when the academic budgets go in and then when the
system part budgets go in. You're operating off of
different funding sources, and you have
different sets of requirements of what you can and
cannot give in the way of merit increases and that
sort of thing. So that always presents another
problem. So that is the main type of thing. As far as
I know, we have not really been
considered either pro or con by other engineering
departments, primarily outside of that. because
we don't have that strong relationship with them.
We do have a number of joint employees from other
departments on campus, but it's generally a one or
two from each department and not a big number. So
it's not a major problem that if we get a research
project that's going to demand three full-time
employees and we take them out of the department,
where are they going to get those people to teach
their courses? You know, that sort of problem. And
it is a problem. Now, was it a line item
appropriation down through the years? We went in,
we originally went in as a joint budget because of
Dean Benson was operating both TTI and TEAS, as
well as the College of Engineering. So we
submitted a joint budget to the legislature,
which was TEAS and TTI.